---
layout: post
comments: true
author: Justin Pietsch
title: "Jeff a Network Architect: A Fable"
excerpt: 
description: Jeff is a Network Architect who needs better network tools
---
A journey into improving the operations of a working network.

Jeff is a senior network architect of a fairly complicated network in a big business. As an architect in his company, he is in meetings with other architects and senior managers across IT. He's noticed that the network has an outsized role on the ability of the company to deliver on IT projects and on the ability of the company to be available for customers. If the network is down, everything is down. If the network is late on a projects, it affects many teams.

He notices that other parts of IT don't trust the networking team. There are many reasons, some of them are that the Networking teams uses so many weird acronyms. Also, they don't explain themselves well. And the problem is always the network. Well, the other teams don't know how to know if the network is the problem or not. A compute person knows how to at least get started on looking at a database or storage system, but the network is opaque.

His major focus is datacenter networks. In his thinking about delivering projects and operating the networking, he realized he needs better understanding and insight into his network and to operational changes. Where should he start, should it be process or technology focused? He's going to look at technology. Is the problem the network design? Hmmm, maybe, maybe not. How can he figure out the status of his network? He realizes he needs software tools to help him understand his network and what needs to get better.

His current network monitoring is adequate. His team gets notified when devices or interfaces go down. They have a dashboard that tells them when something is down. For the most part they rely on their customers to tell them that something bad has happened and when that happens they can look at the dashboards to see if anything is down that shouldn't be. The monitoring also allows them to investigate traffic issues and see if there is congestion and packet loss when somebody complains about slowness. But he realizes they want to be more proactive. 

He starts looking into outages and sees (as expected) that most of the outages are triggered by changes to the network, just like every other network.

## where to get started

What does he need?
* ways of understanding his whole network
* ability to know if his network is healthy or unhealthy
* network change validation
* a way to describe if his network is behaving as expected
* monitoring of all metrics
* monitoring operational state data
* ways to troubleshoot and find root cause

### Network Health

### Validation



### better troubleshooting tools



### taking responsibility to know the network is broken



### What's next
better automation. It's not enough to just be able to write things in a template
get data into a SOT

## Summary


## Conclusion

## So what?
* you need to raise the bar; the network is so critical that you need to think about it that way
*  you need better tools to help you with operating your network


